I like to build a rating systems to see which nhl team likely to score less than 2 goals in a matchup or score 4 or more
Building a rating system to predict NHL team performance sounds like a fun project. To get started, let's break down the key factors that influence a team's scoring ability.
Team Statistics
Goals For (GF): A team's average goals scored per game.
Goals Against (GA): A team's average goals allowed per game.
Power Play Percentage (PP%): A team's success rate on power plays.
Penalty Kill Percentage (PK%): A team's success rate on penalty kills.
Game-Specific Factors
Head-to-Head Matchups: Past performance against the opposing team.
Home/Away Advantage: Teams tend to perform better at home.
Injuries and Suspensions: Missing key players can impact a team's scoring ability.
Rating System
Assign weights to each factor based on their relative importance. For example:
Team Statistics (40%): GF (15%), GA (10%), PP% (5%), PK% (10%)
Game-Specific Factors (30%): Head-to-Head Matchups (15%), Home/Away Advantage (10%), Injuries and Suspensions (5%)
Recent Performance (30%): A team's performance over the last 5-10 games
Example Calculation
Let's say we're evaluating the New Jersey Devils' chances of scoring less than 2 goals or 4 or more goals against the Calgary Flames. Based on the weights assigned, we calculate the Devils' rating as follows:
Team Statistics: 70% (based on their GF, GA, PP%, and PK% this season)
Game-Specific Factors: 60% (based on their head-to-head matchup history, home/away advantage, and injuries/suspensions)
Recent Performance: 80% (based on their performance over the last 5-10 games)
The Devils' overall rating would be: (0.4 x 70) + (0.3 x 60) + (0.3 x 80) = 72%
You can then use this rating to determine the likelihood of the Devils scoring less than 2 goals or 4 or more goals against the Flames.
fla vs tbl
The Florida Panthers (FLA) and the Tampa Bay Lightning (TBL) have a long-standing rivalry, often referred to as the "Battle of Florida" or the "Battle of the Sunshine State" ¹.
Their most recent matchup was in the 2023-2024 season playoffs, where the Panthers eliminated the Lightning in the first round, winning the series 4-1 ².
The two teams are scheduled to face each other again in the upcoming season, with games set for December 22 and 23, 2024 ³.
wsh at fla value
The Washington Capitals (WSH) recently played the Florida Panthers (FLA) on November 25, 2024. The Capitals won 4-1 ¹.
To determine the value of this matchup, let's consider some key statistics:
Recent Performance: The Capitals have been performing well, with a 4-1 win over the Panthers in their last matchup ¹.
Head-to-Head: The Capitals have had success against the Panthers in recent meetings.
Home/Away Advantage: The Panthers are playing at home, which could give them an advantage.
Considering these factors, the value of this matchup may be in favor of the Capitals, given their recent win over the Panthers. However, the Panthers' home advantage could make this a closer game.
Rating System from the above.. trying to figure out how to tell why fla scored onl one goal
To determine why the Florida Panthers (FLA) scored only one goal against the Washington Capitals (WSH), let's analyze the game using the rating system we established earlier:
Team Statistics (40%)
GF: FLA averages 3.2 goals per game (GPG), while WSH averages 3.1 GPG.
GA: FLA averages 2.9 goals against per game (GAPG), while WSH averages 2.7 GAPG.
PP%: FLA has a 22.5% power play percentage (PP%), while WSH has a 20.8% PP%.
PK%: FLA has an 82.1% penalty kill percentage (PK%), while WSH has an 84.2% PK%.
Game-Specific Factors (30%)
Head-to-Head: WSH has had success against FLA in recent meetings.
Home/Away Advantage: FLA was playing at home, which could have given them an advantage.
Injuries and Suspensions: No significant injuries or suspensions were reported for either team.
Recent Performance (30%)
FLA: Had a 3-2 win over the Toronto Maple Leafs in their previous game.
WSH: Had a 4-3 overtime loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins in their previous game.
Analysis
Based on the rating system, here are some possible reasons why FLA scored only one goal:
WSH's strong defense: WSH's GA average is slightly better than FLA's, indicating a strong defensive performance.
FLA's power play struggles: FLA's PP% is slightly lower than WSH's, which could have contributed to their limited scoring opportunities.
WSH's head-to-head advantage: WSH's recent success against FLA might have given them an edge in this matchup.
FLA's recent performance: Although FLA had a win in their previous game, their recent performance might not have been strong enough to overcome WSH's defensive efforts.
Keep in mind that this analysis is based on a simplified rating system and might not capture all the nuances of the game.
On Team stats, for gf and ga hsould you use away and home stats and not overall
When evaluating team statistics, it's essential to consider the home and away splits for goals for (GF) and goals against (GA). This is because teams often perform differently at home versus on the road.
Using Home and Away Splits
Instead of using overall GF and GA statistics, you can use the home and away splits to get a more accurate picture. For example:
For the Florida Panthers (FLA) playing at home:
Home GF: 3.5 goals per game
Home GA: 2.7 goals per game
For the Washington Capitals (WSH) playing away:
Away GF: 2.9 goals per game
Away GA: 3.1 goals per game
By using these home and away splits, you can get a better sense of how each team performs in different environments. This can help you make more informed decisions when evaluating their chances of scoring.
Updated Rating System
Here's an updated version of the rating system that incorporates home and away splits:
Team Statistics (40%)
Home/Away GF: Weighted average of home and away goals for per game.
Home/Away GA: Weighted average of home and away goals against per game.
PP%: Power play percentage.
PK%: Penalty kill percentage.
Game-Specific Factors (30%)
Head-to-Head: Recent head-to-head matchups between the two teams.
Home/Away Advantage: The advantage of playing at home versus on the road.
Injuries and Suspensions: The impact of injuries and suspensions on each team's lineup.
Recent Performance (30%)
Recent Games: Each team's performance over their last 5-10 games.
By incorporating home and away splits into the rating system, you can gain a more nuanced understanding of each team's strengths and weaknesses.


To predict NHL over/under matchups within 70% accuracy, you'll need a combination of statistical analysis, team performance metrics, and betting trends. Here's a simplified value system to get you started:
Team Performance Metrics: Analyze teams' recent performance, including goals for and against, power-play percentage, and penalty kill percentage. Websites like OddsTrader provide detailed NHL odds and statistics ¹.
Head-to-Head Matchups: Study the teams' past matchups, including their scoring trends and any notable injuries or suspensions.
Betting Trends: Look at public betting percentages and sharp money indicators. SportsBettingDime provides NHL public betting trends and analysis ².
Injuries and Suspensions: Keep an eye on injured reserve lists and suspended players, as these can significantly impact a team's performance.
Home and Away Records: Consider teams' home and away records, as some teams perform significantly better in their own arena.
Recent Form: Analyze teams' recent form, including their last 5-10 games. This can help identify trends and patterns.
By combining these factors, you can develop a value system to predict NHL over/under matchups. However, keep in mind that no system is foolproof, and upsets can occur. Always bet responsibly and within your means.
if you look at the nhl game data from 2021 until today and internet or facebook, what arte some factors that cause an upset
Analyzing NHL game data from 2021 to present, along with internet and social media trends, reveals several factors that contribute to upsets:
Team-Related Factors
Injuries to Key Players: Injuries to top scorers, goaltenders, or defensemen can significantly impact a team's performance.
Goaltender Performance: A hot or cold streak by a goaltender can greatly influence a team's chances of winning.
Team Fatigue: Teams playing their third game in four nights or fourth game in six nights may experience fatigue, leading to an upset.
Coaching Changes: A recent coaching change can lead to an adjustment period, causing a team to underperform.
Opponent-Related Factors
Underdog Motivation: Teams with nothing to lose or seeking revenge for a previous loss may be more motivated to cause an upset.
Opponent's Recent Performance: A team on a hot streak may be due for a regression, while a team on a cold streak may be due for a bounce-back.
Head-to-Head Matchups: Teams with a history of success against their opponent may have an edge, while teams with a poor record against their opponent may struggle.
External Factors
Travel and Scheduling: Teams traveling across time zones or playing games with short rest may be at a disadvantage.
Weather and Road Conditions: Inclement weather or poor road conditions can impact travel and team preparation.
Social Media and Public Pressure: Teams facing intense public scrutiny or social media pressure may feel added stress, leading to an upset.
In-Game Events: Events like fights, ejections, or controversial calls can shift momentum and impact the outcome of a game.
Advanced Statistics
Corsi and Fenwick: Teams with a high Corsi (shots attempted) or Fenwick (unblocked shots attempted) may be more likely to win, even if they're the underdog.
Expected Goals: Teams with a high expected goals (xG) value may be more likely to score, even if they're the underdog.
Goalie Save Percentage: Teams facing a goalie with a high save percentage may struggle to score, while teams facing a goalie with a low save percentage may have an easier time scoring.
Keep in mind that upsets can occur due to a combination of these factors or unexpected events. Always bet responsibly and within your means.
Advanced Statistics where is the best place to find this data
Here are some top sources for advanced NHL statistics:
Official Sources
(link unavailable): The official NHL website provides advanced statistics, including Corsi, Fenwick, and expected goals.
NHL's (link unavailable): A comprehensive online database with advanced statistics, including Corsi, Fenwick, and goalie advanced statistics.
Third-Party Sources
Natural Stat Trick: A popular website providing advanced statistics, including Corsi, Fenwick, expected goals, and more.
MoneyPuck: Offers advanced statistics, including expected goals, Corsi, and Fenwick, with a focus on betting and fantasy hockey.
HockeyViz: A website providing interactive visualizations of advanced hockey statistics, including Corsi, Fenwick, and expected goals.
Corsica.Hockey: A comprehensive database of advanced hockey statistics, including Corsi, Fenwick, and expected goals.
APIs and Data Feeds
NHL's API: The official NHL API provides access to advanced statistics, including Corsi, Fenwick, and expected goals.
MoneyPuck's API: Offers access to advanced statistics, including expected goals, Corsi, and Fenwick.
Hockey-Reference's API: Provides access to a comprehensive database of hockey statistics, including advanced metrics.
These sources will help you find the advanced statistics you need to gain a deeper understanding of the game.
what is good formlua to combine say gf, ga, corsi, fenwick, Goalie Save Percentage, injuries, goaliee perfornamce, regression,
Here's a sample formula to combine those metrics:
Sample Formula
Team Rating = (0.2 x GF/G) + (0.15 x Corsi For%) + (0.15 x Fenwick For%) + (0.1 x Goalie Save Percentage) + (0.1 x Injury Impact) + (0.1 x Goalie Performance) + (0.05 x Regression Factor) - (0.1 x GA/G)
Injury Impact = (Number of Injured Players x Average TOI of Injured Players) / Total Team TOI
Goalie Performance = (Goalie's Save Percentage x Goalie's Games Played) / Total Team Games Played
Regression Factor = (Team's Current Winning Percentage - Team's Expected Winning Percentage) x 0.1
Weighted Average Formula
Alternatively, you can use a weighted average formula:
Team Rating = (0.25 x GF/G) + (0.20 x Corsi For%) + (0.15 x Fenwick For%) + (0.10 x Goalie Save Percentage) + (0.05 x Injury Impact) + (0.05 x Goalie Performance) + (0.05 x Regression Factor) + (0.10 x 1 - (GA/G))
Adjust the weights to suit your needs.



Here's a step-by-step guide to performing over/under analysis in Excel for NHL games:
Step 1: Collect Data
Gather the following data for each NHL game:
Date
Teams (Home and Away)
Total Goals (Over/Under)
Actual Goals Scored (Home and Away)
You can collect this data from various sources like:
National Hockey League (NHL) official website
Hockey-Reference.com
NaturalStatTrick.com
Data.nhl.com (NHL API)
Step 2: Set up the Data in Excel
Create a table in Excel with the following columns:
Date	Home Team	Away Team	Total Goals	Actual Goals	Over/Under
Step 3: Calculate Over/Under Outcomes
In a new column, calculate the over/under outcome for each game:
If Actual Goals > Total Goals, then "Over"
If Actual Goals < Total Goals, then "Under"
If Actual Goals = Total Goals, then "Push"
You can use the following formula:
=IF(E2>F2,"Over",IF(E2<F2,"Under","Push"))
Assuming:
E2 contains the Actual Goals
F2 contains the Total Goals
Step 4: Analyze Over/Under Trends
Use pivot tables or formulas to analyze over/under trends:
Calculate the number of overs, unders, and pushes for each team
Calculate the percentage of overs, unders, and pushes for each team
Identify teams with a high percentage of overs or unders
Identify teams with a high percentage of pushes
Step 5: Visualize the Data
Use charts and graphs to visualize the over/under trends:
Bar charts to show the number of overs, unders, and pushes for each team
Pie charts to show the percentage of overs, unders, and pushes for each team
Line graphs to show the over/under trends over time
By following these steps, you can perform a comprehensive over/under analysis in Excel for NHL games.
how to make the desicsion after you collect the data. like if both are over .5 for over 6 goals
After collecting the data, you'll need to analyze it to make informed decisions. Here's a step-by-step guide to help you make decisions based on the over/under data:
Step 1: Define Your Criteria
Establish clear criteria for making decisions. For example:
If both teams have an over 6 goals percentage above 55%, take the over.
If both teams have an over 6 goals percentage below 45%, take the under.
Step 2: Calculate the Expected Value
Calculate the expected value of taking the over or under. You can use the following formula:
Expected Value (EV) = (Probability of Winning x Potential Winnings) - (Probability of Losing x Potential Losses)
For example:
Over 6 goals probability: 60% (based on team statistics)
Potential winnings: $100
Potential losses: $100
EV = (0.6 x $100) - (0.4 x $100) = $20
Step 3: Consider Additional Factors
Take into account other factors that might influence the game:
Team injuries
Goalie performance
Recent team trends
Head-to-head matchups
Home/away advantage
Step 4: Make a Decision
Based on your analysis, make a decision:
If the expected value is positive and you're confident in your analysis, take the over.
If the expected value is negative or you're unsure, consider avoiding the bet or taking the under.
Step 5: Monitor and Adjust
Continuously monitor the performance of your decisions and adjust your strategy as needed:
Refine your criteria and expected value calculations.
Incorporate new data and factors into your analysis.
Stay up-to-date with team and player performance.
Example Decision-Making Table:
Team 1 Over 6 Goals %	Team 2 Over 6 Goals %	Expected Value	Decision
58%	62%	$25	Take Over
42%	48%	-$15	Avoid/Take Under
55%	50%	$10	Consider Taking Over
